---
layout: post
title:  "Pure FP with Scala - recommended books"
date:   2019-05-26 00:00:00 -0000
tags:
- scala
- functional programming
- books
---

## Book review: Functional Programming in Scala

Author(s): Paul Chiusano and Rúnar Bjarnason
Published: 2014
Publisher: Manning 

Also known as the red book for obvious reasons, this book has a great foreward by Scala creator Martin Odersky. Taking you by the hand the authors walk you through what likely mirrors their own experiences as they worked to find useful pure functional techniques in Scala back before anybody else was doing it. The tone is one of self driven discovery, which inspires the reader that you can learn this stuff, you just have to take it at your own pace, work through the exercises and conduct your own experiments.

The book is structured in four distinct parts. Part one is an introduction to functional programming which starts with laying out the definition of pure functional programming that will be described. Some of Scala's features are explained such as pattern matching and higher kinded types. Next the user is taken through the implementation of immutable data types like list, and error handling with Either. There are code samples and exercises throughout. To get the most from the book you should be working on the exercises, although you can certainly just read the text first then come back later to build on your understanding. If you have Manning's new livebook version, you can do the exercises right on the web page while you're reading.

Part two takes a diversion into the design process which is extremely valuable. There are several examples of useful programming libraries, and we are shown how to think about building programs not from sequences of imperative instructions, but from an algebra of types and how they can compose together. During the process we are encouraged to implement more features, to think about the impicit laws that our algebras should have, how to implement things in terms of other things and so on. This is preparing us for later on when some of these patterns will be given names and the laws will be formalized.

Personally I found part 2 moved a little two fast when I was beginning pure fp in scala, and I skimmed through it, returning much later to work through it in detail.

In part three we are now familiar with basic pure fp patterns in Scala and how to think about building programs from algebras and relations between them. The segue is smooth from that to giving names to some of the common patterns we identified and working through what laws they have. Starting with Monoid, we will see the definition of these abstract concepts, and work through a generic implementation that can be used wherever we spot the pattern. This is a long and involved part of the book, going on to cover Monads, Applicatives and finally Traverse. The exercises help you tease out the relationships between the different operations, and which you can implement in terms of the other. This really helps solidify the concepts in my experience. For example we see that Monad can be implemented with three different sets of operators, and thus arrive at a definition of Monad beyond "it has pure and flatmap". And so 200 pages into the book the reader should have a pretty solid grasp of Monads. We got here slowly and methodically and without reference to Burritos.

Part four is an important final step in our journey to building pure functional programs. We learn how to manage side effects in a principled way 




